SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS 1. 2. Human economy is driven by resources and energy. In 1980 the international union for the conservation of nature (IUCN) published world conservation strategy that included one of the first references to sustainable development as global priority and introduces the term “Sustainable Development” 3.In 1987, the United Nations World Commission on environment and development released the report “Our Common Future” commonly called as Brundtland Report. 4. To rally countries to work and pursue sustainable development together , the UN decided to establish Brundtland Commission whose chairperson was “Vs Gro Harlem Brundtland” the former prime minister of Norway due to her strong background in sciences and public health. 5.Most common quoted definition of Sustainable Development: “Sustainable Development is the development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs”. In brief it is the
Development: “Sustainable Development is the development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs”. In brief it is the organizing principle for sustaining finite resources necessary to provide for the needs of the future generations inthe planets.And it is quoted from Brundtland Report. 6. It contains two key concepts: Needs limitations The concept of The idea of need in particular limitations the essential need (imposed by the of the worlds poor | state of to which overriding | technology and priority should be social organisation given on the environments ability to meet present and future needs. 7. Sustainable development is the organizing principle for: 1. Meeting the human development goals. 2.While at the same time sustaining the ability of the naturals systems to provide the natural resources and ecosystems services upon which the economy depends. Sustainability 1. Etimologically : SUSTAIN( to give
same time sustaining the ability of the naturals systems to provide the natural resources and ecosystems services upon which the economy depends. Sustainability 1. Etimologically : SUSTAIN( to give support, to hold up , to bear, to keep up’+ ABLE+ITY 2. Sustainable is an adjective for something that is able to be sustained ie something bearable and capable of being continued at a certain level. 3. It is a process by which something is kept at a certain level. 4.|It can also be defined as the “practice of maintaining processes of productivity indefinitely—natural or human made— by replacing rescues used with resources of equal or greater value without degrading or endangering natural biotic systems”. In other words it is defined as the practice of reserving the resources for future generations without any harm to the nature and components of it. THREE PILLARS OF SUSTAINABILITY 1.Economy, Society and Environment. These principles are informally used ass Profit, People and Planet.
without any harm to the nature and components of it. THREE PILLARS OF SUSTAINABILITY 1.Economy, Society and Environment. These principles are informally used ass Profit, People and Planet. 2.Fourth pillar is Governance —_ . Sustainability Science: is the study of the concepts of sustainable development and environmental science.There is also f bh both 3.renny passed made this 4.ocus on print generations responsibility to regenerate and maintain and improve planetary resources for use by future generations. 5. Sustainable Development ties together the concern for carrying capacity of natural systems with social, political and economic challenges faced by the humanity 6. Sustainability requires that human activity which only uses natures resources at a rate which they can be replenished naturally.(Unsuatianble situation when natural capital( sum of natural resources) is used up faster than it can be replenished. 7.Following the publication of Rachel Carsons Silent Spring, the developing
situation when natural capital( sum of natural resources) is used up faster than it can be replenished. 7.Following the publication of Rachel Carsons Silent Spring, the developing environmental movement drew attention to the relationship between economic growth and development and environmental degradation. Modern concept of sustainable development is also rooted in earlier ideas of sustainable forest management and 20th century environmental concerns. 1.As the concept developed the focus has shifted to more on economic development, social development and environmental protection for future generations. 2.It has been suggested that the term sustainability (target)should be viewed as the humanities target goal of “Human-ecosystem equilibrium’“HOMEOSTATIS"” while sustainable develoomnt (way to reach target)refers to the holistic approach and temporal processes that lead us to the end point of sustainability. The desirable end result is a state of society where living and conditions and
to reach target)refers to the holistic approach and temporal processes that lead us to the end point of sustainability. The desirable end result is a state of society where living and conditions and resource use continue to meet human needs without undermining the integrity and stability of the natural systems. It is a process that envisions a desirable future state for human societies in which living conditions and resource-use continue to meet human needs without undermining the "integrity, stability and beauty" of natural biotic systems. SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT DOMAINS Scheme of sustainable development: Sustainable development, or sustainability, has been described in terms of three spheres, dimensions, domains or pillars, i.e. at the confluence of three constituent parts the environment, the economy and society. The three-sphere framework was_ initially proposed by the economist René Passet_in 1979. It has also been worded as "economic, environmental and social" or "ecology,
the economy and society. The three-sphere framework was_ initially proposed by the economist René Passet_in 1979. It has also been worded as "economic, environmental and social" or "ecology, economy and equity". This has been expanded by some authors to include a fourth pillar of culture, institutions or governance, or alternatively reconfigured as four domains of the social ecology, economics, politics and culture, thus bringing economics back inside the social, and treating ecology as the intersection of the social and the natural. The SDGS are to implemented and achieved in every country from year 2016 to 2030. SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS No Poverty End poverty in all its forms everywhere. Zero Hunger End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture. Good Health and Well-being Ensure healthy lives and promote wellbeing for all at all ages. Quality Education Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning
Good Health and Well-being Ensure healthy lives and promote wellbeing for all at all ages. Quality Education Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. Gender Equality Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls. Clean Water and Sanitation Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. Affordable and Clean Energy Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable, and modern energy for all. Decent Work and Economic Growth Promote sustained, inclusive, and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment, and decent work for all. Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization, and foster innovation. Reduced Inequalities Reduce inequality within and among countries. Sustainable Cities and Communities Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable. Responsible
Reduced Inequalities Reduce inequality within and among countries. Sustainable Cities and Communities Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable. Responsible Consumption and Production Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns. Climate Action Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts. Life Below Water Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas, and marine resources for sustainable development. Life on Land Protect, restore, and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, manage forests sustainably, combat desertification, halt and reverse land degradation, and halt biodiversity loss. Peace, Justice, and Strong Institutions Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all, and build effective, accountable, and inclusive institutions at all levels. Partnerships for the Goals Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for
for all, and build effective, accountable, and inclusive institutions at all levels. Partnerships for the Goals Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development. Natural Resources Il 1.Rocks are made of minerals. They are aggregate of one or more minerals. 2. Granite-four minerals-feldspar, quartz, mica and ampibole 3. Minerals are made of element Mineral Elements Quartz Oxygen, silicon Feldspar Oxygen, silicon, aluminum, calcium, sodium, potassium Mica Oxygen, silicon, aluminum, iron, potassium, magnesium 4. Arnphibole Oxygen, silicon, aluminum, iron, calcium, magnesium a aad 5.8 common elements compose 98% of continental crust rocks eg Silicon , Aluminum(most abundant in crust) 6. Rocks are classifies into three types based on how they were formed. 1. Igneous: 2. Sedimentary 3. Metamorphic: 7.Quartz: most common crystalline form of SiO2 and the second most abundant mineral in earth crust after feldspar 8. Earths crust is mainly
were formed. 1. Igneous: 2. Sedimentary 3. Metamorphic: 7.Quartz: most common crystalline form of SiO2 and the second most abundant mineral in earth crust after feldspar 8. Earths crust is mainly Igneous rocks and the rock that we see on the surface is sedimentary, especially in Himalayas. In the crust On the surface Sedimentary (B) rock 5% (A) Sedimentary Rocks ‘They are those type of rocks that are formed by the deposition of material at the arts surface and within the bodies of water 2. They form horizontal layers(beds) oldest beds at the bottom and the youngest beds at the top 3. Three types of sedimentary rock:Clastic,;Chemical and Biochemical: They are identified by the materials that make up the rock or the process by which h they are formed. Clastic Sedimentary Rocks: They are composed of rocks and mineral fragments and the most common type of rock: sedimentary rock. Three stages of formation: Generation , Transportation and Lithification Chemical Sedimentary Rocks: They form
of rocks and mineral fragments and the most common type of rock: sedimentary rock. Three stages of formation: Generation , Transportation and Lithification Chemical Sedimentary Rocks: They form when the mineral precipitate from a solution as a result of changing physical conditions Here, solutions= Fresh water in lakes, groundwater or seawater Changing physical condition=increased temeperatures (evaporation) They can be readily dissolved in water and transported to oceans They are indicative of shallow, coastal marine conditions In the geological past Chemical Sedimentary rocks are also termed as Evaporates as they are mostly formed by precipitation due to evaporation. Biochemical Sedimentary Rocks 1. They link the biosphere and geosphere 2.From due to actions of living organisms that cause minerals To be extracted from solution. OR from the remains of dead organisms. 3. The mineral calcite is present in the rock limestone formed by coral organisms that build tropical reefs Ex:
cause minerals To be extracted from solution. OR from the remains of dead organisms. 3. The mineral calcite is present in the rock limestone formed by coral organisms that build tropical reefs Ex: Coquina: it is a limestone from from broken shell fragments. Coal: Carbon rich rock formed from compacted plant remains. Metamorphic Rocks It arises from the transformation of existing rock types in a process called metamorphism which means “change in form”. The original rock : protolith is subjected to heat and pressure causing profound physical and / or chemical changes. Protolith may be sedimentary rock , igneous rock or older metamorphic rock. Metamorphic rocks make up a large part of earth and are classified by texture and chemical and mineral assemblage(metamorphic facies) Metamorphism: Changes in the mineral composition and texture that can occur in solid rock. These changes may occur due to increasing temperature / pressure / presence of fluids. Here temperatures are high enough to
in the mineral composition and texture that can occur in solid rock. These changes may occur due to increasing temperature / pressure / presence of fluids. Here temperatures are high enough to cause chemical changes ut not melting of the rock. Approx 200-1100 C.similar conditions are found near magma. 1. Increased pressures and temperatures cause tabular minerals to take on a prefered orientation, foliation, perpendicular to direction of pressure. ~ Un-metamorphosed, non-folii original rock (graniteigneou roc) with random distribution minerals Metamorphic rock (gneiss) wii foliation illustrates parallel alignment of minerals Igneous Rocks Ignis:fire and these rocks are formed through the cooling and solidification of magma or lava. Granite, basalt and obsidian are examples of igneous rocks Igneous rock my form with or without crystallisation 1. If below the surface intrusive(plutonic) rocks 2.On the surfaceextrusive(volcanic ) rocks Melting is caused by one or more of the three
rocks Igneous rock my form with or without crystallisation 1. If below the surface intrusive(plutonic) rocks 2.On the surfaceextrusive(volcanic ) rocks Melting is caused by one or more of the three processes 1. An increase in temp 2.A decrease ion pressure 3.A change in composition Types of Igneous Rocks:-The same magma can form both rock types; 1. Volcanic Rocks: forms when magma rises to earth's surface. Produces from volcanoes, lava flows and tephra and molten rock cools rapidly. 2. Plutonic Rocks:Form when magma solidifies below earths surface. Volcanic eruption Produces plutons that remain hidden until exposed by erosion—> molten rock cools slowly—-> slow Cc 1. ooling produces large, visible crystals. Size of crystals of minerals in igneous rocks depends upon the rate of cooling of magma Texture: Igneous Rocks 1.Rapid cooling produces microscopic crystal 2. Brittleness: Rapid cooling can make crystals more brittle or soft than crystals that cool slowly 3. Slow cooling produces
magma Texture: Igneous Rocks 1.Rapid cooling produces microscopic crystal 2. Brittleness: Rapid cooling can make crystals more brittle or soft than crystals that cool slowly 3. Slow cooling produces large visible crystals Crystal size is interpreted to learn where rocks were formed Colour:lgneous Rocks Colour varies with silica content Silica-rich minerals such as quartz and feldspar are light-coloured Silica-poor minerals such as amphibole, biotite are dark coloured PLASTIC POLLUTION 1.What are plastics ? : They are synthetic materials made from oil or natural gas. They are made by linking thousands of monomers (like bisphenol-A (BPA) and vinyl chloride. 1. Polyethelyne-bottles ,jars, bags and cups 2. Polystyrenecups and pellets 3. Polypropylene-bottlecaps and drinking straws 4.PVCshoes pipes and furniture 2. Various compounds produced by polymerization capable of being moulded, excluded or cast into shapes and films or drawings into filaments and then used as textile fabrics is
pipes and furniture 2. Various compounds produced by polymerization capable of being moulded, excluded or cast into shapes and films or drawings into filaments and then used as textile fabrics is known as plastic. 3. World's First fully synthetic plastic: Bakelite, invented in New York by Leo Hendrik Beckland. While producing Synthetic Varnish found new formula to make “plastic” (term coined by him) from coal tar. And he named it “Beckelite”once formed could not be melted. The term plastic comes from greek word “Plasticos” which means “fit for moulding”. 4.Platsics now are derived from petroleum and coal tar 5. Hermann Staudinger: Father of polymer chemistry (SPC) 6. Herman Mark: Father of polymer physics. 7.During the First World War plastic took off and acted as a substitute for wood, glass, metal during the hardships and after world war newer plastic were used. 8. Terylene, Darcon Coth and Hawaii chapels getting popularized in early 1960s. 9. With this we entered into a plastic Age
metal during the hardships and after world war newer plastic were used. 8. Terylene, Darcon Coth and Hawaii chapels getting popularized in early 1960s. 9. With this we entered into a plastic Age and it was considered as a “common", a symbol of consumer society (It was inexpensive till then). 10. “High tech plastics": Used in demanding field such as health, aviation and technology. Thermoset Thermoplatsic Material that Materials which strengthens when _ can be reheated, heated but cannot remolded and be remoulded after cooled as needed initial forming. without causing and chemical changes. They are riding and They are flexible hard and soft 11. Anthropogenic materials: materials that are created or influenced by human activities, rather than occurring naturally 12. Reasons for plastic pollution: 1. Inexpensive 2. Lightweight 3. Strong 4.Durable 5. Easy to use 13. About three metric tones of plastic is estimated to be entering the oceans every 15sec 14. Polymers is composed of many
pollution: 1. Inexpensive 2. Lightweight 3. Strong 4.Durable 5. Easy to use 13. About three metric tones of plastic is estimated to be entering the oceans every 15sec 14. Polymers is composed of many simple molecules that are repeating structural units called monomers. A single Polymer molecule may consist of hundreds to a million monomers and may have. Linear, branched or network structure. These polymers are: 1. easily moulded into complex shapes 2. stiff and hard or flexible and soft 3. have high chemical resistance 4.more or less elastic 14. Plastics—plastic pollution when they are not disposed off properly. 15.In India plastic made a vigorous beginning in 1957 with the production of polystyrene 16."The market for plastic” was seeded by set owned Indian petro chemicals and it was in 1994 that plastic soft drink bottles became a visible source of annoyance IMPACT OF PLASTIC ON BIODIVERSITY ANIMALS 1. Effects in Cattles: injecting plastic 2. Entanglement: plastic wires se 3. Effects
that plastic soft drink bottles became a visible source of annoyance IMPACT OF PLASTIC ON BIODIVERSITY ANIMALS 1. Effects in Cattles: injecting plastic 2. Entanglement: plastic wires se 3. Effects in marine animals: 1. Effects in corals 2. Impacts of fishing gears(Ghost Fishing) 3. Ingestion by marine animals 4.Effects in Birds 5.Spread of invasive species. Over 1000000 sea birds and 100000 marine animals and 1000s of sea turtles are killed by plastic every year The ocean is heavily polluted because of plastics released from ships and rivers that flow into ocean. Dead beached whale are commonly found with stomachs full of plastics Pollution 1. Phones and computers generate e-waste like lead, brominated flame retared and chromium which is carcinogenic. 2. Extrapolation of plastic waste generation data from 60 major cities shows that around 25940 tonnes of plaice waste is generated per day in India. 3. Plastic bags clogs the drainage system causing floods in towns and big cities. 4. The
data from 60 major cities shows that around 25940 tonnes of plaice waste is generated per day in India. 3. Plastic bags clogs the drainage system causing floods in towns and big cities. 4. The cheap recycled plastic bags contains chromium, cadmium or lead based chemicals especially colored bags harmful to health: they leach into vegetables meat and food items causing health hazards. 5. Indias consumption of plastic bags is one of the highest int the world 6. The slide highlights the conflict between traditional “waste nothing” values and modern consumerism, causing widespread plastic pollution. It emphasizes the lack of awareness and proper waste disposal infrastructure. Moreover, it stresses the environmental impact, noting that hundreds of cows die annually from choking on plastic bags while consuming vegetable waste in garbage. 7.Ganges and two nearby waterways are responsible for pumping three billion microplastics into the Indian Ocean OCEAN PLASTIC POLLUTION 1. Large plastic
while consuming vegetable waste in garbage. 7.Ganges and two nearby waterways are responsible for pumping three billion microplastics into the Indian Ocean OCEAN PLASTIC POLLUTION 1. Large plastic pieces can entangle marine animals while tiny peices broken down by the action of water and the sun cause harm by entering the Marine food chain 2.Once plastic reaches the oceans it is spread throughout the world by wind and global ocean currents 3. Fishing nets are usually made of plastics and van be left or lost in the ocean by fishermans. They are known as ghost nets and these entangle fish dolphins, sea turtles , sharks dugongs seabirds crabs and other creature. 4. Impact: plastic restrict their movement, cause them to starve . Laceration-damaging soft tissues and causing infections and causes suffocation to those who needs to return to the surface to breathe. 5. Plastic debris when bulky or tangled is difficult to pass and may become permanently loved in digestive tracts of the animals
suffocation to those who needs to return to the surface to breathe. 5. Plastic debris when bulky or tangled is difficult to pass and may become permanently loved in digestive tracts of the animals which blocks the passage of the food and causes their death by starvation or infection 6.80% of marine debris is plastic which has been increasing from the end of world war 2 7. Plastics photodegrade( to microplatics) on exposure to the sun causing their breakdown but they do so under proper dry conditions. But water inhibits this process and in marine environments plastics photodegrade into ever smaller pieces while remining polymers and even down to molecular level. 8. When floating plastics photodegrade down to zooplankton sizes, jellyfish attempt to consume them and in this way plastics enter the ocean food chain and many of these long lasting pieces of plastics end up in the stomacshs of marine birds and animals including sea turtles and black footed albatross. 9. Microplastics
enter the ocean food chain and many of these long lasting pieces of plastics end up in the stomacshs of marine birds and animals including sea turtles and black footed albatross. 9. Microplastics bioaccumulate in fish and shelllfish and then biomagnify through the food chain 10. There are five major circular currents Called gyres that plastic pollution accumulates in.(Gyres: large system of rotating ocean currents). They are namely: North Pacific, North Atlantic, south pacific, south Atlantic and indo-oceanic 11. The ocean cleanup has developed a trawl net to skim plastic from the gyre and about 10 tonnes was collected from 79000 tons 12. Boyan Slat (CEO of Sean cleanup): Dutch inventor invented first ocean plastic cleanup system and he not be on the ship when it launches because he is seasick. Best inventions of 2015: System O07 After five and a half years of hard work, the 23-yearold Slat will watch from dry land as System OO — a floating barrier nearly 2,000ft long — snakes its way
Best inventions of 2015: System O07 After five and a half years of hard work, the 23-yearold Slat will watch from dry land as System OO — a floating barrier nearly 2,000ft long — snakes its way out under the Golden Gate Bridge into the Pacific. Its destination is the Great Pacific Garbage Patch, a gyre of plastic waste twice the size of Texas held in position by ocean currents between California and Hawaii. BISPHENOL A (BPA): A POTENTIAL HEALTH HAZARD 1.BPA leaches from plastics and resins when exposed to hard use or at high temperatures like in microwave or hot milk bottles. 2.BPA is and endocrine disruptor because it mimics estrogen a natural hormone 3. It increases the incidents of heart diseases, diabetes , liver disorders, infertility , brain and homormone development problems in fetus and young children. It promotes breast cancer; brings about early puberty in girls and decreases sperm count in men.(Children are more exposed to BPA 93% BPA + out of those whose urine was tested)
and young children. It promotes breast cancer; brings about early puberty in girls and decreases sperm count in men.(Children are more exposed to BPA 93% BPA + out of those whose urine was tested) BURNING PLASTIC 1.Burning of plastic released toxic poisonous gas called DIOXIN( polychlorinated dibenzo-pdoxin and polychlorinated dibenzopurans) 2.|t contains chlorine and produced when chlorine and hydrocarbons are heated at high temperatures. 3.Inhaling Dioxin can lead to lung cancer BANNING THE USE OF PLASTIC 1.in idgamandalam district of tamilnadu and Simla of UP the use of plastic bags is completely banned. MoEf has banned the use of plastics of particular dimensions. RECYCLING OF PLASTIC 1. Primary Recycling — Similar or original product 2. Secondary Recycling— Product different from the original 3.Tertiary Recycling —Production of basic chemicals and fuels 4. Quaternary Recycling —Retrieves energy content by burning/incineration They break down into tiny toxic particles that
the original 3.Tertiary Recycling —Production of basic chemicals and fuels 4. Quaternary Recycling —Retrieves energy content by burning/incineration They break down into tiny toxic particles that contaminate the soil and waterways and enter the food chain when animals accidentally ingest them. The problems surrounding waste plastic bags starts long before they photodegrade. Our planet is becoming increasingly contaminated by our unnecessary use of plastic bags. A plastic bag can take between 400 to 1,000 years to break down in the environment. As it breaks down, plastic particles contaminate soil and waterways and enter the food web when animals accidentally ingest them. ... Plastic, comprising 8% by weight and 20% by volume of municipal waste, is a visible and dominant pollutant due to its low density and slow decomposition. Recycling scrap plastic is successful and economical, but recovering discarded plastic from consumers is challenging. Manual sorting of garbage for recycling is
low density and slow decomposition. Recycling scrap plastic is successful and economical, but recovering discarded plastic from consumers is challenging. Manual sorting of garbage for recycling is time-consuming and expensive. Automated sorting, based on various physical, optical, or electronic properties of plastic, has been successfully developed and employed. However, these methods are difficult due to the variety of sizes, shapes, and colors of plastic. Recycle refers to rubbish into useful products. Recycling reduces the pollution by minimizing the energy spent during the manufacturing process which in turns reduces the greenhouse gases in the environment. Recycling saves natural resources. Plastic waste disposal through Plasma Pyrosis Technology(PPT) is the inversion of plastic waste into liquid fuel.Biodegradable plastics DEGRADABLE PLASTIC 1.One success story was introducing carbonyl! groups into polyethene by mixing carbon monooxide with ethylene during synthesis. 2. These
into liquid fuel.Biodegradable plastics DEGRADABLE PLASTIC 1.One success story was introducing carbonyl! groups into polyethene by mixing carbon monooxide with ethylene during synthesis. 2. These carbonyl groups are chomospheres that lead to chain breaking upon the absorption of UV light 3.Bags made from corn starch has been introduced in India by greendiamz biotech Itd. 4. TRUEGREEN 5. AmpAcet 6. The compostable biodegradable plastic bags gets converted into invaluable compost under normal composting conditions which help to improve the nutritional quality of the soil. Natural Resources | Coal producing states in India Anthracite; LN D1tA — “| Most of the coal mined in India comes from the rock formations of two. geological ages viz. | Lower Gondwana and Tertiary. About 80 per cent of the coal deposits in India is of bituminous type and is of non-coking grade. _%| This is one of the , . | reasons that India has to rely upon imports of coking coal. ‘Sty Napan UNIVERSITY Coal producing
coal deposits in India is of bituminous type and is of non-coking grade. _%| This is one of the , . | reasons that India has to rely upon imports of coking coal. ‘Sty Napan UNIVERSITY Coal producing states in India Tertiary coalfields: (Tertiary Informal term for a sub-era of the Cenozoic, lasting from 65 million to c.2 million years ago.) * Assam accounts for 632% of the total rertiary coal reserves, Major coal fields in Assam are the Makum, Nazira, Mikir Hills and Dilli-Jeypore. OF these, the Makum is the most developed field. Among the other fields West Darrangiri, Langrin and Bapung in Meghalaya, Namchik in Arunachal Pradesh and Borjan in Nagaland are important. Lignite coalfields: * Lignite coal is mainly produced in two states — Small lignite coal fields are also found in Rajasthan and Jammu and Kashmir. Neyveli is the lignite field in Tamil Nadu which is located in South Arcot district. * Neyveli is the largest lignite coal mine of India. This field supplies fuel for ‘Thermal
and Jammu and Kashmir. Neyveli is the lignite field in Tamil Nadu which is located in South Arcot district. * Neyveli is the largest lignite coal mine of India. This field supplies fuel for ‘Thermal power generation in Tami Nadas Suny Napatt UNIVERStTY During burial and conversion to rock, organic compounds are chemically transformed into petroleum: maturation GLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES 1. LARGEST GLOBAL ENV ISSUES: acid rain, global warming, ozone depletion, smog, water pollution, natural resource depletion and rainforest depletion. 2. Env issues are created due to human activities and cause harm to environment. Env issues are interconnected 3. Humans are putting natural carbon cycle out of balance. 4.Mauna Loa Observatory’s location marks an ideal sport for sampling earth's air. It is located in Hawaii on the side of Mauna Loa, the world largest active volcano. It is 3400km above sea lvl and remain a long distance away from significant pollution sources(anthropogenic) 5. Sometime
located in Hawaii on the side of Mauna Loa, the world largest active volcano. It is 3400km above sea lvl and remain a long distance away from significant pollution sources(anthropogenic) 5. Sometime during the 21st century the conc of co2 will be twice as it was before Industrial Revolution. Co2 increase global temp increase this was proposed by Arrhenius 6. The temperature rise will be small in tropics but much greater at high altitudes 7.Green house effect is a natural process that keeps the earth warm. It is attributed by the molecules like CO2 ,H20 AND CH4 which can modify the planets energy budget by absorbing the long wave thermal radiation (Infrared radiation) emitted from the earths surface. Without greenhouse effect life on earth would be impossible 8. The net effect is the gradual heating of earths atmosphere and surface a process known as global warming 9.CQO2 absorbs infrared radiation, plays crucial role in weathering of rocks, raw material for photosynthesis, carbon is
heating of earths atmosphere and surface a process known as global warming 9.CQO2 absorbs infrared radiation, plays crucial role in weathering of rocks, raw material for photosynthesis, carbon is incorporated in organic matter in the biosphere and may eventually be stored in earth as fossil fuel. 10. Nitrogen and oxygen are transparent to infrared while water vapors and carbon dioxide and methane absorb infrared radiation 11. They collect this heat energy and hold it in the atmosphere delaying its passage back out of the atmosphere 12. Most of the suns energy that falls on earth is the visible light spectrum and this is largely because earth is transparent to these radiations because ozone screens out mostly all the higher frequency waves such as UV. 13. Part of sunlight is reflected back into space depending upon albedo or the reflectivity of the surface ( high albedo means reflects lot of light and low albedo means absorbs a lot of light ex high albedo material is snow and ice) 14.
into space depending upon albedo or the reflectivity of the surface ( high albedo means reflects lot of light and low albedo means absorbs a lot of light ex high albedo material is snow and ice) 14. Temp measurement signify the oceans are warming and sea level is rising because of thermal expansion and glaciers are melting. 15. Sea lvl rose about 30cm during the last century mostly because of thermal expansion of the oceans. Se lvl is expected to rise by 1m during the upcoming century 16. Warmer sea surfaces will result in more and stronger tropical storms such as hurricanes and typhoons 17. Arctic Sea is thinning; Gangotri glacier is shrinking 18. Higher temp will produce more rainfall across globe but regional rainfall patterns will likely to be changedsome areas will get more some areas will get less; the timing of wet and dry periods may changestronger storms and damaging winds 19. Some areas may go from being marginal to breadbasket region whereas some may go from major
some areas will get less; the timing of wet and dry periods may changestronger storms and damaging winds 19. Some areas may go from being marginal to breadbasket region whereas some may go from major agriculture production to marginal. 20. High co2 higher plant growth because its enhances photosynthesis but weeds grow better than crop and crop growth may be nullified by weed growth Natural ecosystems will be hard pressed to keep up with the changing climate because the rate of change will be faster than typical long-term natural climate change. 21.Many species especially plants will not be able to migrate to cooler regions fast enough to keep up with climate change 22. Arctic species will have no place to go and may not be able to adapt to the new conditions 23.Higher heat and expansion of tropical areas may lead to increased incidence of malaria 24. Beginning of 20th century mean temp increased by 0.3 to 0.6 and by the mid of 21st century the mean temp will increase unto 1-5 25. 20th
tropical areas may lead to increased incidence of malaria 24. Beginning of 20th century mean temp increased by 0.3 to 0.6 and by the mid of 21st century the mean temp will increase unto 1-5 25. 20th century was the warmest in the last millennium, 1990s were the warmest decades. 1998 and 2005 were the warmest years in 1000yrs 26. Prior to Industrial Revolution co2 in the atmospheree remained constant at 280 ppm ona global scale for several centuries. 27.Most anthropogenic emissions come from consumption of fossil fuels and deforestation About half of what we produce is taken back into carbon sinks in biosphere and oceans — the rest is left in atmosphere. 28. GWP(global warming potential) of (GHGs) warm the earth by absorbing energy ad slowing the rate at which energy escapes to space 29. Two key ways in which GHGs differ from each other are : their ability to absorb energy( radiative efficiency) and how long they can stay in the atmosphere (lifetime) 30. CO2 has longer lifetime but
Two key ways in which GHGs differ from each other are : their ability to absorb energy( radiative efficiency) and how long they can stay in the atmosphere (lifetime) 30. CO2 has longer lifetime but absorbs less heat whereas methane aborbs a lot of heat but have shorter time period it has higeshst global warming potential 21 times greater than co2. (CO2 has GWP of 1 regardless of time period use because it is the gas being used as the reference) HFCS has highest GWP. 31.GW can be decrease by using fluorescent bulbs instead of incandescent bulb. 32. Other techniques have also been proposed such as chemical removal of co2 from smokestakes and burial in deep underground reservoirs Though only certain areas can benefit from this, or disposal in the deep ocean where they will form a semi-stable compound under the cold temperatures and high pressures, though the CO, could too easily come bubbling back up. 33. Global climate system is the consequence of 34. (A). Atmosphere (B).
a semi-stable compound under the cold temperatures and high pressures, though the CO, could too easily come bubbling back up. 33. Global climate system is the consequence of 34. (A). Atmosphere (B). Oceans(Hydrosphere) (C). lce sheets( cyrosphere) (D). Living organisms(Biosphere) (E). Soils sediment and rocks(Geosphere) 33. Weather refers to shot term atmospheric conditions whereas climate is the weather of a specific region averaged over a long period of time “Climate change” is a change in the statistical distribution of weather patterns when that change lasts for an extended period of time (i.e., decades to millions of years). Climate change refers to long-term changes. Climate change may refer to a change in average weather conditions, or in the time variation of weather around longer-term average conditions (i.e., more or fewer extreme weather events). 1. Factors that shape climate are called climate forcings or forcing mechanisms,Forcing mechanisms can be internal or external *
average conditions (i.e., more or fewer extreme weather events). 1. Factors that shape climate are called climate forcings or forcing mechanisms,Forcing mechanisms can be internal or external * Internal forcing mechanisms are natural processe: within the climate system itself (e.g., the thermohaline circulationthe movement of seawater in a pattern of How dependent on variations in temperature which give rise to changes in salt content and hence 1n density. 3) ¢ External forcing mechanisms can be either naturz (e.g., changes in solar output) or anthropogenic 2. (e.g., increased emissions of greenhouse gases). fast (e.g., a sudden cooling due to airborne volcanic ash reflecting sunlight), slow (e.g. thermal expansion of warming ocean water ), or a combination (e.g., sudden loss of albedo in the arctic ocean as sea ice melts, followed by more gradual thermal expansion of the water). These include processes such as — variations in solar radiation — variations in the Earth's orbit, —
in the arctic ocean as sea ice melts, followed by more gradual thermal expansion of the water). These include processes such as — variations in solar radiation — variations in the Earth's orbit, — variations in the albedo. — mountain-building and — continental drift and _changes in greenhouse gas concentrations. (albedo (the proportion of the incident light or radiation that 1s retlected by a surface, typically that of a planet or moon) ot reflectivitv of the continents and oceans. ) 3. Trends that persist for a decade or more probably signal a shift to a new regime. Instrumental tracking has shown a recent temperature increase of less than 1 degree 4. Coupled with this seemingly minute temp change are the shrinking glaciers , less sea ice , latitudinal limits of some plants and animals have expanded towards the poles 5. The majority of evidence of climate change comes from geologic record 6. Climates of ancient times are referred to as paleoclimate 7.Scientists reconstructing the
have expanded towards the poles 5. The majority of evidence of climate change comes from geologic record 6. Climates of ancient times are referred to as paleoclimate 7.Scientists reconstructing the paleo climates rely on the records of the natural events that closely mimic the climateclimate proxy records 8. Though they lack precision of instrumental data proxy records from different localities can add unto a detailed picture of climatic trends. 9. Cores obtained from the Greenland and antarctic ice sheets provide continuous records of weather conditions for hundreds of thousands of years 10. Glacier ice is laid down in annual layers. Measurement of oxygen isotopes in glacier ice enables scientists to estimate the air temperature when that snow accumulated and the trapped air also provides a sample of ambient air at the time. 11.US + UAE + SAUDI ARABIA + AUSTRALIA are responsible for Artic ice melts 12. Pieter Bruegels Winter landscape with a Bird Trap shows a Time when European
a sample of ambient air at the time. 11.US + UAE + SAUDI ARABIA + AUSTRALIA are responsible for Artic ice melts 12. Pieter Bruegels Winter landscape with a Bird Trap shows a Time when European rivers were likely to freeze over. And paintings from that period also shows more dark skies and clouds 13.Many organism lay down annual growth rings and are potentially useful for providing paleoclimate infotrees and corals 14. Some lake sediments display a distinctive alteration of parallel layers, a pair of these is deposited in a single year is termed as varve and preserves a record of climatic variations 15. Annual climate records can be found in Tree rings , lake sediments and ice layers each year includes early wood(light) and latewood (dark) growth. Wide rings occur during wet, warm years and narrow rings during cold dry years 16. Short term climate change is recorded in tree rings like about 100 yrs buti ts necessary to measure partial record from multiple trees to get a climate record.
narrow rings during cold dry years 16. Short term climate change is recorded in tree rings like about 100 yrs buti ts necessary to measure partial record from multiple trees to get a climate record. 17. Three distinct climate periods for the northern hemisphereMedieval warm period ; The little lce age (very cold but not really an ice age)and by the end of the 19th century the climate moderated leading to our present relatively warn temp 18. Climate records indicate that northern hemisphere experienced glaciation(ice age) during the last 2 million years 19. North America was dominated by a 3km thick continental glacier centered over Canada 20. Weather changes all the time and the average pattern of weather is termed as Climate which remains same for centuries if it is left to itself The effects of climate change depend upon how much change there is, how fast it occurs, and how easily the world can adapt to the n@Werwes = an conditions. 21.IPCCintergovernmental panel on climate change.
of climate change depend upon how much change there is, how fast it occurs, and how easily the world can adapt to the n@Werwes = an conditions. 21.IPCCintergovernmental panel on climate change. It is the international body for assessing the science related to climate change it was set up by WMO(world metereomlogical org) and UNEP(United Nations environmental program. Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to provide policymakers with regular assessments of the scientific and options for adaptation and mitigation. 22.IPCC provide a scientific basis for the governments at all levels to develop climate related properties The assessments are policy-relevant but not policyprescriptive: — they may present projections of future climate change based on different scenarios and — the risks that climate change poses and discuss the implications of response options, — but they do not tell policymakers what actions to take. First IPCC report |Underlined the (FAR) importance of climate change as a
change poses and discuss the implications of response options, — but they do not tell policymakers what actions to take. First IPCC report |Underlined the (FAR) importance of climate change as a challenge with global consequences and requiring international cooperation SAR -“Impacts, An assessment of Adaption and the ten avaialable vulnerability” scientific and socio economic information on climate change TAR-“mitigation of The synths report climate change” was released in phases in time to pave the way for negotiations on reducing carbon emissions at the UN climate change conference in Paris The Paris Agreement is an agreement within the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) dealing with greenhouse gases emissions mitigation, adaptation and finance starting in the year 2020, The agreement will only enter into force provided that 55 countries that produce at least 55% of the world's greenhouse gas emissions ratify, accept, approve or accede to the agreement;
year 2020, The agreement will only enter into force provided that 55 countries that produce at least 55% of the world's greenhouse gas emissions ratify, accept, approve or accede to the agreement; although the minimum number of ratifications has been reached, the ratifying states do not produce the requisite percentage of greenhouse gases for the agreement to enter into force. Paris repot was open for signature on earth day Paris Agreement on Climate Change ¢ The agreement will only enter into force provided that 55 countries that produce at least 55% of the world's greenhouse gas emissions ratify, accep approve or accede to the agreement; * although the minimum number of ratifications has been reached, the ratifying states do not produce the requisite percentage of greenhouse gase for the agreement to enter into force. ¢ Three aim of Paris agreementFinance, technology and capacity building support(Art. 9, 10, II). the Paris agreement’ five key points— First universal climate
for the agreement to enter into force. ¢ Three aim of Paris agreementFinance, technology and capacity building support(Art. 9, 10, II). the Paris agreement’ five key points— First universal climate agreement — Limit temperature well below 2° C — Helping poor nations. — Publishing greenhouse gas reduction targets. soRngiathgn neutral by 2050. 5, rentaty — SHIV NADAR UNIVERSITY > OZONE DEPLETION 1. Stratospheresecond major layer of earths atmosphere. It is stratifies in temperature with warer layers higher up and cooler layers further down this is on entreats with the troposphere near the earths surface which is cooler higher up and warmer farther down 2. Ozone layer is situated at the top of stratosphere 35 to 50 km above earths surface and its thickness varies seasonally and geographically 3. Its earths own “Block system” and yet stops 97-99% of the incoming UV UVC Shorts wavelength Most dangerous filtered out by the atmosphere UVA & UC Causes skin cancer and wrinkles after repeated
3. Its earths own “Block system” and yet stops 97-99% of the incoming UV UVC Shorts wavelength Most dangerous filtered out by the atmosphere UVA & UC Causes skin cancer and wrinkles after repeated long term exposure 4.UV rays can penetrate through your clothes (UV Blocking fabricsUPF clothes) 5. Upto 80% uv rays can pass thru clouds and affect us 6. SPF 15 lotion blocks out 92 % of UV that reaches earths surface. Protects from UVB rays 7.Glass filters out UVB radiation but UVA gets through because it penetrates deeper this why many adults have more freckles on their right side more than their left during driving 8. UV breaks O2 into O atoms. O atoms combine with O2 to form ozone and UVB strikes and ozone and breaks it back down to an O2 molecule and an O atom G@) O,+tUVPO+TOC heat) (ii) O,+tO DO, 9 (iii) O; tUV>O,+ OCF heat) 10. No long term change in the concentration of ozone occurs 11. UV radiation is converted from light o heat by the destruction of oxygen molecules and ozone
O,+tO DO, 9 (iii) O; tUV>O,+ OCF heat) 10. No long term change in the concentration of ozone occurs 11. UV radiation is converted from light o heat by the destruction of oxygen molecules and ozone molecules 12. Temp rises with increasing altitude in stratosphere for the same reason 13.Ozone Depleting Substances: CFCs, HCFCs HBFCs Methyl and other halogenated ozone depleting substances. Methyl bromide Usedasa fumigant to kill pest by suffocating CCL4 & Halons Fire estingusihgers Methyl Cholorfrn |Cleaning metal parts and circuits boards and industrial solvents 14. Equivalent Effective Stratospheric Chlorine(EESC): the total amount of effective halogens(cl and br) inthe stratosphere can be calculated . * a steady decline of about 4% in the total amount of ozone in Earth's stratosphere (the ozone layer), , and * a much larger springtime decrease in stratospheric ozone around Earth's polar regions. ° The latter phenomenon is referred to as the ozone hole. 15. In addition to these well
ozone layer), , and * a much larger springtime decrease in stratospheric ozone around Earth's polar regions. ° The latter phenomenon is referred to as the ozone hole. 15. In addition to these well known stratospheric phenomena there are also springtime polar tropospheric ozone depletion events 16. Both the processes are catalytic destruction of ozone by atomic halogens and the main source of these halogens in the stratosphere is the photodissociation of man made halocarbon refrigerants 17. They are destroyed by free radical substitution the most of which are hydroxyl radial, nitric oxide, chlorine and bromine, tho OH and NO in stratosphere is of natural origin but human activity has significantly increased the levels of chlorine an bromine in the atmosphere 18. CFCS: they are volatile organic compounds.(non flammable, non toxic) used as aerosols propellants and refrigerants and they are inert and they remain in the atmosphere for about 200 yrs but they can be broken down by photolysis
compounds.(non flammable, non toxic) used as aerosols propellants and refrigerants and they are inert and they remain in the atmosphere for about 200 yrs but they can be broken down by photolysis (UV) radiation which frees chlorine from CFCs 19. They find a way to the stratosphere without being destroyed in the troposphere due to their low reactivity Cl: + O03 — ClO + O2: The chlorine atom changes an ozone molecule to ordinary oxygen ClO + O3 — CI: + 2 O2: The CIO from the previous reaction\destroys a second ozone molecule and recreates the griginal chlorine atom, which can repeat the first reaction and continue to destroy ozone. 20. Montreal protocol in us banned aerosol sprays 21. Antarctic ozone hole 22.Why is ozone depletion concentrated over Antartica?nice weather patterns over AntarticaPolar vortex.A polar vortex is an upper level low pressure area lying near earths pole. A large area of low pressure and cold air surrounding both of earths poles. Two polar vortices: north and
vortex.A polar vortex is an upper level low pressure area lying near earths pole. A large area of low pressure and cold air surrounding both of earths poles. Two polar vortices: north and south beneath that lies a large mass of cold dense arctic air. Leads to the formation of of polar stratospheric clouds (water +nitric acids / sulphuric acids) 23. The nitric acid in the air reacts with CFCs which catalyses the photochemical destruction of ozone 24. They are mainly formed during the event of a polar vertex in winter more intense at South Pole The Cl-catalyzed ozone depletion is dramatically enhanced in the presence of polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs) . 25. Polar stratospheric clouds accelerate ozone depletion 26. Ice particles in these clouds provide surface on which the chemical reactions can occur including the release of calorie bearing compounds 27.|In spring temperature rises processes that produce ozone outpace destruction and ozone begins to increase 28. Ozone formation and
can occur including the release of calorie bearing compounds 27.|In spring temperature rises processes that produce ozone outpace destruction and ozone begins to increase 28. Ozone formation and destruction are temperature dependent phenomenon ACID RAINS 1. It contains elevated levels of hydrogen ions 2.\It ls a popular term referring to the deposition of a mixture from wet and dry deposition wet (rain, snow, sleet, fog, cloud-water, and dew) and dry (acidifying particles and gases) acidic a9 components . 3. Distilled water once co2 removed has a ph of 7 4.Clean and unpolluted rains have acidic ph but not lower than 5.6 because of formation of carbonic acid during to co2 in the atmosphere 5. It can also contain nitric acid produced by electric discharge in the atmosphere such as lightening 6. Formation of h2so4 and hno3 as secondary pollutants and also presence of hydrogen sulphide and chlorine results in acid rain ph less than 4.4 7.h+ and so42ions leach nutrients from the soil. 8.
6. Formation of h2so4 and hno3 as secondary pollutants and also presence of hydrogen sulphide and chlorine results in acid rain ph less than 4.4 7.h+ and so42ions leach nutrients from the soil. 8. Acid rain also inhibits the activity of symbiotic nitrogen fixing bacteria present in the nodules of leguminous family 9. Due to acid rain limetsone is converted to gypsum 10. It is also responsible for wiping out many bacteria and blue green algae disrupting the ecological balance. Prevention of acid rain via limitation of pollution emissions, using of catalytic converters, limitation of fossil fuel and bio-fuel burning 11. Catalytic converters convert harmful gases into less harmful substances before releasing them into the atmosphere 12. Fitting scrubbers into factories chimneys thy are chemical filters that remove sulphur from smoke, fit special converters in cars. 13. Urban heat island effect causes cities to be warmer during to absorptive properties of asphalt and pavement and reduced
filters that remove sulphur from smoke, fit special converters in cars. 13. Urban heat island effect causes cities to be warmer during to absorptive properties of asphalt and pavement and reduced airflow during to blocked winds large buildings block wind flow causing updrafsts and down drafts 14. Urban heat extremes are the result of two distinct phenomenon the Urban heat island effect and green house effect 15. Urban heat islands are defined as urban and suburban areas with elevated air temperatures relative to the surrounding rural areas or wild lands 16. UHI are produced by four factors: 1. Use f dark , dense paving and building materials 2.3D buildings which absorb solar radiation and restrict air circulation 3. Reduced abundance of vegetation which decreases shade and restricts evapotranspiration 4. And the addition of heath from anthropogenic sources mentioned above 5. Urban heat extremes are caused by a combination oh UHI and global greenhouse effect 6. Extreme heat kills more
4. And the addition of heath from anthropogenic sources mentioned above 5. Urban heat extremes are caused by a combination oh UHI and global greenhouse effect 6. Extreme heat kills more people the than any weather related factor Green infrastructure offers benefits in the form of improved storm water management, air quality, carbon sequestration, and microclimate regulation. 17.Cool pavements : light colored n permeable; cool roofs which are white blue or green, increase in plating of vegetation and reduce waste heat 18. (UNCCD), ‘desertification’ is defined as "land degradation in arid, semi-arid, and dry sub-humid areas, resulting from various factors, including climate variations and human activity. “ 19. Desertification doest refer to the expansion of existing deserts ee a ae =» > 7 ihficld report», ~ x om » aK 4 ¥ ia oe % ‘4 : a, SNA 2) : : . eS wee . Se ft eat ‘ngs WS ot — . Biodiversity ce 2a ~ <g> y > ~$arth aN 24101 “Date of ex 31st August 2024 ; “Date af Subinission: “th
7 ihficld report», ~ x om » aK 4 ¥ ia oe % ‘4 : a, SNA 2) : : . eS wee . Se ft eat ‘ngs WS ot — . Biodiversity ce 2a ~ <g> y > ~$arth aN 24101 “Date of ex 31st August 2024 ; “Date af Subinission: “th Beptember 2024 i ee Table of Contents Preface 01 Background 02 Introduction And 03 Itinerary Butterfly 09 Conservatory Medicinal 11 Conservatory Aravali Range 15 Observations 16 Collage 18 1.Pretace Fig 1. Group photo near the Aravali Biodiversity park entrance | would like to express my gratitude to Dr. Prem Pandey, our professor for Environmental Studies at Shiv Nadar University, whose passion subject never ceases to amaze me. His endless patience and dedication to this subject is something | truly look up to. | am thankful to him for providing us with the valuable opportunity to visit “Aravali Biodiversity Park” located in Gurgaon, Delhi a lush pocket of greenery near the bustling capital city. | have always been fascinated by the nature, its beauty amazes me and its inner workings
Biodiversity Park” located in Gurgaon, Delhi a lush pocket of greenery near the bustling capital city. | have always been fascinated by the nature, its beauty amazes me and its inner workings intrigue me, due to this, visiting Biodiversity parks has been a favourite pastime of mine. Therefore, | consider myself very fortunate to have gotten the opportunity to visit this beautiful biodiversity park and learn about our environment thorough exploring it. Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 2.Background he medicinal conservatory AZ Fig 2. Walking towards The field study tour to “Aravalli Biodiversity Park” was conducted by Dr. Prem Pandey to help us the students understand regional biodiversity in Delhi by providing us with practical exposure. Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 3.Introduction & Itinerary Fig 3. Photo near the Aravali Biodiversity park entrance The field study tour was conducted in batches in which | was a part of the Batch 1 which went on the 31st of August, 2024. We were instructed to gather
near the Aravali Biodiversity park entrance The field study tour was conducted in batches in which | was a part of the Batch 1 which went on the 31st of August, 2024. We were instructed to gather near the cricket ground at “7:30 A.M.” after which departed. The bus ride was nearly 3-hours long during which we slept as it was still early in the morning. Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 3 We arrived at the park at 9:30 A.M. and as soon as | got down and entered the park | was hit by a cool gust of wind, | could hear a myriad of birds chirping and see lush green trees, as it had just rained just a few days prior, the weather was humid and cool hence, it was truly a sight to behold. On our way to meet our trip instructor we saw a beautiful peacock near some of the trees. We also spotted some centipedes on the ground. While walking Dr. Prem Pandey told us about the history of the park. i ws tage *3 Fig 4. Sighting of a peacock Afterwards, while we were waiting for our trip instructor “Ms. Balvinder
on the ground. While walking Dr. Prem Pandey told us about the history of the park. i ws tage *3 Fig 4. Sighting of a peacock Afterwards, while we were waiting for our trip instructor “Ms. Balvinder Kaur”, “Dr. Prem Pandey” told us about the fact that monocot plants have parallel venation, whereas dicot plants have non-parallel venation. Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 4 After waiting for approximately 15 minutes, we met our tour instructor, “Ms. Balwinder Kaur”. After introductions she told about her experiences in the parks and some fun facts about the park like the fact that "Viylati Kikar" (Prosopis juliflora) which is a kind of mesquite is the most predominant species of flora found here. Fig 5. "Viylati Kikar" (Prosopis juliflora) She explained that it is an invasive Mexican species brought by the Britishers before 1947 to increase the green cover of the Aravali range as it had been destroyed by them for mining and other purposes. Although this did help recover the forest growth, it
by the Britishers before 1947 to increase the green cover of the Aravali range as it had been destroyed by them for mining and other purposes. Although this did help recover the forest growth, it had adverse side effects, it depleted the groundwater reserve of the Aravali range, left the soil acidic and it also caused asthma problems for people. Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 5 Their leaves caused tooth decay in animals and severely depleted the soil health. Hence to cease further growth of the plant it was decided that they would kill off all the saplings and remove the fallen seeds of this tree. XS . Fig 6. Butterfly cacoon She informed us about how the park now has more than 120 butterfly and 200 bird species which is the highest recorded in Delhi. Next, she informed us that vultures have gone extinct in India due increace in “Diclofenac” in their diet. Exposure to this drug caused kidney failure in vultures, leading to their death. Now, a captive breeding program is being run near
gone extinct in India due increace in “Diclofenac” in their diet. Exposure to this drug caused kidney failure in vultures, leading to their death. Now, a captive breeding program is being run near Meerut, Dehradun, Haryana, Jhajjar, Panchkula, and Chandigarh to reintroduce them in the future. Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 6 She also informed us about the funeral ritual of the Parsis and how important vultures were as a part of their death ceremony. In recent times, the government has taken measures So that they don't leave dead bodies in the jungle. She also informed us that birds of prey can't be identified by simple sighting or some marks on their body even by seniors in the ornithology department. They can only be identified by their call. > » mp Fig 7.1 Mica Fig 7.2 Mica on Path Next, she told us about the migration of birds. Birds migrate 365 days and are of two types summer and winter migration. Birds do so because of the shortage of food on their main grounds. She also told us about
us about the migration of birds. Birds migrate 365 days and are of two types summer and winter migration. Birds do so because of the shortage of food on their main grounds. She also told us about sparrows and how they migrated from cities to other places because of enclosed homes. Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 7 Fig 8. Bird sighting at Aravli Biodioversity park She informed us that sparrows are called "house sparrows" because they used to build their nests in the homes of humans, and now due to completely enclosed homes they have migrated to other region to build their nests. Fig 9. Poster of the birds found at Aravali Biodiverty park Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 8 4.Butterfly Conservatory Fig 10. Overview of the butterfly conservatory at Aravali Biodiversity Park After climbing down from some stairs we reached the butterfly conservatory where Ms Balvindar Kaur told us that a butterfly conservatory is a place where all the elements that a butterfly require to complete their whole life cycle
we reached the butterfly conservatory where Ms Balvindar Kaur told us that a butterfly conservatory is a place where all the elements that a butterfly require to complete their whole life cycle can be found. There are plants with flowers for nectar, leafy plants where they may lay their eggs, and marshy lands for the salt-licking process. Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 9 Fig 11. Plumbago Auriculata : Fig 12. Su nflowers She also told us some interesting facts about dragonflies, such as the presence of dragonflies prevents the spread of dengue. The reason behind this is that both mosquitoes and dragonflies lay eggs in clean and stagnant water, and dragonfly’s offsprings are caterpillars that feed on Fig 13. Lilly pond at Butterfly Conservatory Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 10 5.Medicinal Conservatory ae . = we Fig 14. Medicinal Conservatory at Aravli Biodiversity Park Ms. Balvinder Kaur gave us a tour of the medicinal Conservatory and during it also told us about the medicinal values of various
ae . = we Fig 14. Medicinal Conservatory at Aravli Biodiversity Park Ms. Balvinder Kaur gave us a tour of the medicinal Conservatory and during it also told us about the medicinal values of various plants there. 1% Drumstick tree (Moringa oleifer)Drumsticks are used in soups and sambar and are very good for our health. Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 11 Fig 16. Aloe vera (Aloe barbadensis Mill) Aloe vera (Aloe barbadensis Mill)is used in shampoos, face wash, and it is also eaten by several people because it helps in flushing out the waste from the body. ee ae Fig 17. Long pepper (Piper longum) Long pepper (Piper longum)It's fruit is cylindrical and it helps to cure cold, cough, and fever. It’s oil is also used in skin aromatherapy. Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 12 Fig 18. Harsingar (Nyctanthes arbor-tristis) Harsingar (Nyctanthes arbor-tristis)The problem of joint pain and arthritis can be solved if we drink the fresh juice of its leaves. Fig 19. Arbi (Wild Colocasia ) Arbi(Wild Colocasia )|t
Harsingar (Nyctanthes arbor-tristis)The problem of joint pain and arthritis can be solved if we drink the fresh juice of its leaves. Fig 19. Arbi (Wild Colocasia ) Arbi(Wild Colocasia )|t helps cure problems related to ulcers. Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 Fig 20. Curry leaves (Bergera koenigii) Curry leaves (Bergera koenigii)It's a source of calcium. When its leaves are boiled with oil, it helps with hair-related issues such as hair fall and greying of hairs. Apart from this, if a patient suffering from diabetes and blood pressure eats its leaves, then it can be controlled. If someone not dealing with the problem of diabetes and blood pressure eats its leaves, there's a high probability that he or she will not face any issue related to blood pressure or diabetes. She also told us that peacock feathers are a source of calcium for porcupines, which helps them in the formation of quills. Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 14 Ca 6 Aravali Range Fig 20. Viewpointue ee mine At last, she took us to a view
feathers are a source of calcium for porcupines, which helps them in the formation of quills. Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 14 Ca 6 Aravali Range Fig 20. Viewpointue ee mine At last, she took us to a view point where we could see a part of the Aravli range. She told us that the valley was a mine before where illegal mining of mica and china clay took place and after taking over the land they planted trees and restored it. This was the last part of our field visit. Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 15 mt — =a ba x % « ee 5 = om me ae | a, ac bee 7. Observations pata henel g Ree Ng Sa Fig 21 Students walking in the nature trail This field trip was on of the best trips of my life, not only did | learn a lot about the flora and fauna | also experienced it. Breathing in the fresh air, feeling the cool breeze on my face, listening to the chirping of different birds and the sweet smell of flowers in the air, the glittering mica on the walking trackeverything took my breath away. Ms. Balvindar Kaur
breeze on my face, listening to the chirping of different birds and the sweet smell of flowers in the air, the glittering mica on the walking trackeverything took my breath away. Ms. Balvindar Kaur informed us about the various medicinal benefits of the plants and also many interesting facts about birds, plants and animals. Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 16 | also observed several mushrooms growing on the ground, several beautiful trees and moss on stones. Fig 24 Greenry at Aravali Biodiversity Park Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 17 Sarthak Sethi 2410110472 Ecosystems | 1. Ecology: is the study of relationship between organisms and its environment. 2.Ecosystem: itis a place where the interactions of living and non living occurs functioning together. Roy first used the term but it was AG Tansley, who coined the term & fully defined the concept of ecosystem 3. Father of ecology in India: RD Mishra 4. Trophic level: it is the position of an organism that it occupies in a food chain. oThe CBD defines
the term & fully defined the concept of ecosystem 3. Father of ecology in India: RD Mishra 4. Trophic level: it is the position of an organism that it occupies in a food chain. oThe CBD defines an “ecosystem” as a “dynamic complex of plant animal and micro-organism communities and their non-living environment interacting as a functional unit’ 5. The ecosystem is a major structural and functional unit of ecology. 6. Complex ecosystem has high species diversity o 3. The function of ecosystem is related to energy flow and material cycles within and outside the system. 7.Complex ecosystems need less energy ie more complex more stable. 8. Young ecosystems develop and change from less complex to more complex ecosystems through the process called succession. 9. Each ecosystem has its own energy budget which cannot be exceeded. 10. The function of every ecosystem involves a series of cycles eg rater, nitrogen,oxygen etc 8. The function of every ecosystem involves a series of cycles, e.g.,
budget which cannot be exceeded. 10. The function of every ecosystem involves a series of cycles eg rater, nitrogen,oxygen etc 8. The function of every ecosystem involves a series of cycles, e.g., water cycle, nitrogen cycle, oxygen cycle, etc. these cycles are driven by energy. A continuation or existence of ecosystem demands exchange of materials/nutrients to and from the different components. 11.Ecosystem services: are the fundamental life support services upon which human civilisation depends. Ex:direct ecosystem service-pollination indirect servicesclimate moderation, nutrient cycles. 12.Climatographs: graphs between avg precipitation and avg temperature over a typical year in a biome. (Precipitation bar graph temperature-line graph) The interaction between living organisms and their environment is a two-way _ processorganisms affect their surrounding and the surroundings affect the organisms. 13. Ecosystem has two components: biotic and abiotic The two most significant abiotic
environment is a two-way _ processorganisms affect their surrounding and the surroundings affect the organisms. 13. Ecosystem has two components: biotic and abiotic The two most significant abiotic factors in biomes are temperature and precipitation, which are influenced by: o Latitude o Altitude o Prevailing winds Nearby mountains 14. Latitudes near the equator receive more direct sunlight and greater amount of warming. 15. As latitude(elevation above sea level) increases temperature and primary productivity tends to decrease due to changing sun angle. @ As latitude increases, temperature and primary productivity tend to decrease due to the changing sun angle. Temperature Deciduous Forest \Ice Cap Evergreen Forest Forest 16. Biotic components: producers(Autotrophs synthesise their own food in the presence on sunlight) & consumers(heterotrophs) 17.Heterotrophs feed on autotrophs 18. Chemosynthetic Bacteria are found in deep ocean waters and produce their own food by the process of
food in the presence on sunlight) & consumers(heterotrophs) 17.Heterotrophs feed on autotrophs 18. Chemosynthetic Bacteria are found in deep ocean waters and produce their own food by the process of chemosynthesis from hydrogen sulphide 19. Macro consumers:1. Primary consumers:they mainly feed on plants 2. Secondary consumers:carnivores feed on primary consumers 3. Tertiary consumers:carnivores that feed on secondary consumers. 20. Omnivores:both plant and animal eaters 21.Bacteria or fungi derive energy and nutrients from dead organic matter. (detritus feeders) 22.Role of composers and microorganism is very important in nutrients cycle. 23.Functions of an ecosystem: 1. Flow of energy: 2. Continual recycling of chemical elements 24. Flow of energy between two ecosystem follows law of thermodynamics. 25. Open ecosystems: energy doesn't recycle and they need a new in flow of energy. Energy inputs to ecosystems drive the flow of matter --within organisms and their environment in a
thermodynamics. 25. Open ecosystems: energy doesn't recycle and they need a new in flow of energy. Energy inputs to ecosystems drive the flow of matter --within organisms and their environment in a process called Bio-geochemical cycle. 26. Gross primary productivity(total energy absorbed by the producers) —> energy lost as heat in respiration---->remaining output of energy is stored as leaves fruits stems.(net primary productivity) 27.Net primary productiviy=gross primary productivityrespiration. 28.10% RULE: it states that only 10% of energy from one trophic level is incorporated into another. le some energy is lost as heat. Food chain | Food web | One path of energy | O All possible energy paths type of complex food chain. o The basic function of energy is to make the proauction of organic martrer possibie 0 The total amount of organic matter in any arricuiar ecosysTem Is Tne DIOMASS o Biomass increases as a result of biological production, the transformation of energy into matter
martrer possibie 0 The total amount of organic matter in any arricuiar ecosysTem Is Tne DIOMASS o Biomass increases as a result of biological production, the transformation of energy into matter by biological processes 29. Bio mass=organic matter 30. Magnesium is an essential element for photosynthesis it is part of chloroplast which prepare food for plants. 31. Solar energy is converted to chemical energy by primary producers. 32. Primary Productivity:rate of energy capture by producers. 33. Types of Ecosystem —— Terrestrial Aquatic —H -—— Forest Grassland Desert Marine Fresh water —— Lote river, stream or soring, Lent lake, pond or swamp 34. Biomes are large-scale ecosystems defined by their climate, vegetation, and the interconnected communities of organisms adapted to those environmental conditions. Aquatic Ecosystem 1. Hardeness: The amount of minerals (calcium and magnesium) in freshwater. 2. Temperature measures the average kinetic energy of the water molecules (warmest near
conditions. Aquatic Ecosystem 1. Hardeness: The amount of minerals (calcium and magnesium) in freshwater. 2. Temperature measures the average kinetic energy of the water molecules (warmest near the equator) 3. Dissolved oxygen: oxygen per mL of water. It is highest in cold an turbulent water(dissoultion of gas decreases with increase in temperature). 4. Rainwater is acidic due to Co2 and ocean water is base due to CO*%3ions pH 8.2 5. Main salt In ocean NaCl 6. Temperature is highest where solar energy recieved is highest. le near equator. 7.Ocean Conveyor: is amoving system of deep ocean currents that circulate warmth across the globe 8. The El Nino cycle is a periodic warming of Pacific Ocean waters that disrupts global weather patterns, causing extreme events like droughts and floods. EINiio Yer —— Westerly winds diminish La Nina Year “+ Cold conditions dominate Surface salinity decreases, + Cen, See US reducing upwelling “+ Severe weather in western Pacific, Warm water remains in
EINiio Yer —— Westerly winds diminish La Nina Year “+ Cold conditions dominate Surface salinity decreases, + Cen, See US reducing upwelling “+ Severe weather in western Pacific, Warm water remains in Pacific Heavy rains occur in SA Droughts in western Pacific, Pin, inetie ¢ Good rains in India Re Dea DAAINEV Marine & Ocean Ecosystems 1. Intertidal Zone: where ocean and land meets.(Submerged during high tides and dry during low tide) 2. Ocean has two parts :Photic(receive light) and Aphotic zones Rocky shores Sandy shores Substrate is hard | Substrate is and stable shifting and unstable Erosion is slow Erosion is fast Black sand Volcanic rock Brown sand Quartz White sand Coral 3. Marine ecosystem are largest of earths aquatic ecosystems. They cover 2/3 of earths land. 4.Coral reefs are ecosystems built on the exoskeleton of coral polyps.. they are found in warm, shallow and sunlight water 5, 6. Ex coral reef: Great Barrier Reef Australia 7.Coras get bleached due to global warming and
built on the exoskeleton of coral polyps.. they are found in warm, shallow and sunlight water 5, 6. Ex coral reef: Great Barrier Reef Australia 7.Coras get bleached due to global warming and they expelled algae. 8. Open ocean:part of ocean beyond continental shift. 9. 10. around scavenging and decomposition. 11. Marine Snow: the abyssal plain receives a constant flow of detritus(dead matter) from above. Coastal Ecosystems 1. Wetlands along the shoreline and in shallow seas. 2. Coastal Lagoon OCEAN-DOMINATED 3. As river approaches oceans sped slows down and then it deposits the sediment that it carries and forms river delta. 4.Salt marshes are tidal flats dominated by grasses and herbs. 5. Seagrass bed contain submerged plants that resemble grass. 6. Mangrove forest have trees with roots that can filter salt. 7.Mangrove forest provide coastal protection by dissipating 90% of wave energy. 8. Dissolved oxygen levels change from high tide to low tide due to the variation in water
roots that can filter salt. 7.Mangrove forest provide coastal protection by dissipating 90% of wave energy. 8. Dissolved oxygen levels change from high tide to low tide due to the variation in water movement, mixing, and salinity. At high tide, oxygen-rich ocean water flows in, increasing oxygen levels. At low tide, the water becomes more stagnant, and oxygen levels may decrease due to limited mixing and higher concentrations of organic matter that consume oxygen. 9. An adaptation in larger fish to survive low tide is their ability to slow down their metabolism. Fresh water ecosystem They are different from marine ecosystems because they have low salt content. Freshwater ecosystems are of two types: Lotic ecosystem — Lentilc ecosystem Flowing water Relatively still water Ex: springs , rivers |ex: Lakes ponds 1. Flow is unidirectional. 2. There is a state of continuous physical change. 3. There is a high degree of spatial and temporal heterogeneity at all scales (microhabitats). 4.
rivers |ex: Lakes ponds 1. Flow is unidirectional. 2. There is a state of continuous physical change. 3. There is a high degree of spatial and temporal heterogeneity at all scales (microhabitats). 4. Variability between lotic systems is quite high. 5. The biota is specialized to live with flow conditions. 1. Riverine ecosystem: lotic ecosystem. © Bacteria: Bacteria are present in large numbers in lotic waters. Free-living forms are associated with decomposing organic material, biofilm on the surfaces of rocks and vegetation (Slime), in between particles that compose the substrate, and suspended in the water column. 2. Algae consisting of phytoplankton and periphyton are the most significant source of primary production in most streams and rivers. 3. Phytoplankton float freely In water and thus are unable to maintain populations in fast flowing streams. (found in slow moving rivers and backwaters). They are autotrophic. 4.Periphyton are filamentous tufted algae that can attach
and thus are unable to maintain populations in fast flowing streams. (found in slow moving rivers and backwaters). They are autotrophic. 4.Periphyton are filamentous tufted algae that can attach themselves to objects being washed away by fast currents. They form a geletanious unanchored floating mat. ponds & pools lakes They have their They do not have entire bottom their entire bottom surface exposed to | surface exposed to water water. 5. Largest freshwater lake:Lake Baikal 6. Littoral , pelagic and benthic DIFFERENT ZONES OF A LAKE ECOSYSIEM | Compensation Depth Depth where photosynthesis is equal to Respiration. Dr. Prem PANDEY 7.Compensation Depth:where rate of photosynthesis =rate of respiration. 8. Longest Lake in India: Vembanad and largest in kerela and it also is the largest wetland system in India after Sunderbans. 9. Chilika lake:braksih water lagoon 10. Wular Lake : largest fresh water lake in Asia 11.Loktak Lake: floating lake because of phumdis Wetland Ecosystem It is a
system in India after Sunderbans. 9. Chilika lake:braksih water lagoon 10. Wular Lake : largest fresh water lake in Asia 11.Loktak Lake: floating lake because of phumdis Wetland Ecosystem It is a distinct ecosystem that is flooded by water either permanently or seasonly where oxygen free processes prevail. The primary factor that distinguishes wetlands from other land forms or water bodies is the characteristic vegetation of aquatic plants, adapted to the unique hydric soil. Weltlands are lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems Conditions for wetland: 1.Water present on land or in roots must be saturated during growing seasons 2. Plants that grow in wet conditions. 3. Soil should be poorly drained that exhibit anaerobic conditions. 4. Wet lands are not necessarily wet all year round. Wetlands are called as natures kidneys because they cleanse our environment They can contain free or brackish or combination of both Kuttanad wetlands: o Kuttanad, the 'Rice Bowl of
all year round. Wetlands are called as natures kidneys because they cleanse our environment They can contain free or brackish or combination of both Kuttanad wetlands: o Kuttanad, the 'Rice Bowl of Kerala’, lies at the very heart of the backwaters in Alappuzha district. olt has been speculated that it is perhaps the only place in the world where farming is Saline environment: develops crops tolerant to saline environments in combination with the use of saline soil and water resources. Wetlands are among the most productive ecosystems in the world, comparable to rain forests and coral reefs. Asfenjis;a; wetlands se that is alkaline: FR FS : ‘pH PIS A swamp| lis a wetland: ee ) A marsh)isja wetland whose’ dominant vegetation with/other forms of is trees and woody seas vegetation) dominant. Functions of wetlands: 1. Improve water quality by filtering sediments 2. Provide breeding grounds for fish and shellfish 3. Modifying the effects of flooding by slowing runoff 4. Provide food and
Functions of wetlands: 1. Improve water quality by filtering sediments 2. Provide breeding grounds for fish and shellfish 3. Modifying the effects of flooding by slowing runoff 4. Provide food and recreation for summer. 5. This helps recharge and discharge groundwater(store during excess and release during dry periods) 6. They also reduce momentum and prevent soil erosion 7. They assist in flood control. 8. They store carbon instead of releasing it to the atmosphere. Thus they help moderate global climate 9. They help retain sediments and increase soil fertility. 10. They help filtering out water pollution 11.Mangroves can protect shorelines from strong winds and reduce the impact of hurricanes and tsumnamis. Threats to wetlands 1.development : draining of wetlands for constructions 2.Global warming 3.Sand and gravel mining Ramsar Conventions Convention on wetlands signed in Ramsar, Iran States to plan for wise and sustainable use of all wetlands in their territories Forests
2.Global warming 3.Sand and gravel mining Ramsar Conventions Convention on wetlands signed in Ramsar, Iran States to plan for wise and sustainable use of all wetlands in their territories Forests Ecosystems It is a large area of land covered with trees or other woody vegetation. According to UN FAO forests is a land of more than 0.5% ha with a canopy cover of more than 10% which is not primarily tree under agricultural or other specific non forest land 1. Canopy:upper layer or habitat zones formed by mature tree crowns 2.Emergent layer is the upper most layer and it receiveds the most direct sunlight 3. Highest net primary productivity area of forest:Canopy 4.Understory: the layer of vegetation below the canopy where only 5% sunlight reaches 5. Forest floor is the bottommost layer of the forest which has community centred around decomposition. Broadleaf trees Coniferous trees Wide maximise Narrow wax sun absorption coated leaves Prone. To moisture |Absorb less loss via sunlight and
forest which has community centred around decomposition. Broadleaf trees Coniferous trees Wide maximise Narrow wax sun absorption coated leaves Prone. To moisture |Absorb less loss via sunlight and transpiration transpire less water Shed leaves during | Not shed leaves prolonged dry during cold or dry seasons or winters. | Season Open and closed forests Open forests Closed forests Tree canopies do ss They have tree not form Canopy coverage continuous closed |of 60-100% cover They are mixture of s=trees shrubs and grasses They occur in They absorb less savanna , semi arid | sunlight and and sub-humid transpire less and humid tropics | water Shed leaves in Remain evergreen winter and throughout the prolonged dry year seasons Forest types Elevation Snow, 3 Latitude High ice , Arctic Alpine . tundra Tree line Coniferous forest Temperate deciduous forest Low Midlatitude Alpine variations of terrestrial biomes Tropical Rainforests Temperate Rainforests They recieve high rainfall and are
. tundra Tree line Coniferous forest Temperate deciduous forest Low Midlatitude Alpine variations of terrestrial biomes Tropical Rainforests Temperate Rainforests They recieve high rainfall and are warm. They have highest net primary productivity of all land based ecosystems. They have broadleaf trees only They also receive high rainfall but have seasonal temperature change. Broadleaf and coniferous trees only Deciduous Forests | Moderate Boreal Forests, taiga Mediterranean forests chaparral precipitation and significant temperature change. Broadleaf trees which shed trees in winters Coldest and driest of all forests . They have coniferous trees only Highly seasonal rainfall and that also during winters Identify the type of forest present in each climatograph ny Temperature (°C) +0 = -20 && 40 50 0 o 60 oO 0 J FMAM) | ASOND J FMAM| J ASOND | FMAM| J ASOND | FMAM] | ASOND Months Months Months Months Wet winters, Warm to Seasonal temperatures Seasonal/cold Warm temperatur hot -dry
-20 && 40 50 0 o 60 oO 0 J FMAM) | ASOND J FMAM| J ASOND | FMAM| J ASOND | FMAM] | ASOND Months Months Months Months Wet winters, Warm to Seasonal temperatures Seasonal/cold Warm temperatur hot -dry summer —_ Moderate precipitation temperatures High precipitatio temperatures Seasonal precipitation Seasonal precipitation Dr. Prem PANDEY © The tropical rainforest biome has four main characteristics: Overy high annual rainfall, Ohigh average temperatures, Onutrient-poor soil, and Ohigh levels of biodiversity (species richness). Dr Prem PANDEY Important zone:On the edges of the stream which is RIPARIAN ZONE September 16" September 18" September 22" September 4" October 5' October 16 October 17% October 6th November 2™4 December 11% December 2"4 February 21 March 22"4 March 23" March 224 April 9-10 May 22"4 May 23" May 5% June 8% June 15" June 17" June (24 Clean Up The World Campaign World Water Monitoring Day World Car-Free Day World Animal Day World Food Day International Day for
April 9-10 May 22"4 May 23" May 5% June 8% June 15" June 17" June (24 Clean Up The World Campaign World Water Monitoring Day World Car-Free Day World Animal Day World Food Day International Day for Eradication of Povert International Day for Preventing the Exploitation of the Environment in War an Armed Conflict National Pollution Prevention Day World Metrological Day World Migratory Birds Day World Turtle Day World Ocean Day Global Wind Day r. Pre Biodiversity Module 1 1.Biodiversity is the diversity of life in all its forms and at all its level of organisation. (richness of a geographic area) 2.All living organisms in different ecosystems in a region of biosphere. 3. Biological Diversity -Raymond F. Dasmann 4. Father of biodiversity WG Rosen 5.Mule-male donkey + female horse 6. Hinnymale Horse+ female donkey 7. Taxonomy-naming ,describing and classifying organisms. (binomial naming is usedGENUS + SPECIES NAME) 8. Taxonomy Diversity-the number and the relative abundance of species in
Horse+ female donkey 7. Taxonomy-naming ,describing and classifying organisms. (binomial naming is usedGENUS + SPECIES NAME) 8. Taxonomy Diversity-the number and the relative abundance of species in a community. 9. Functional! diversity-a part biodiversity that generally covers the range of functional traits of organism in an ecosystem. 10. Morphological Diversityvariations Physical Appreance 11. Genetic diversity-diversity of gene within species 12. Genetic diversity increases the survival rate and adaptability to environment(climate change). 13. A species with more genetic diversity can adapt better to the changed environmental condition. 14. The genetic diversity within a species often increases with environmental variability. 15. Cause of reduction in genetic biodiversity -inbreeding, restricted gene flow, small population size and genetic drift. 16. Speciation-evolution of anew species. 17.Organism diversity-diversity among species in an ecosystem 18. Ecological
-inbreeding, restricted gene flow, small population size and genetic drift. 16. Speciation-evolution of anew species. 17.Organism diversity-diversity among species in an ecosystem 18. Ecological diversity-diversity of a habitat in a given unit area. 19.11-13basic building blocks of diversity 20. Species Diversityvariety of species within a region(from plants to animals) 21.Species abundance refers to the number of individuals of each species in an area, while species richness(DIVERSITY INDEX) is the total number of different species present in that area. >» Species richness and species evenness oS) ag commen redlerer es, * The second community has 4 species, anc and almost 4 number of individual in different number of individual in each each species species. |Community? * One species has one individual, few has 2 and one has up to 10. Which is more (CSA likely to experience stabilityself sustenance? 4 1 2 10 = & 2 ee @ 25% § osu Co $12 @ 10% 8... Community 1 and Community 2 have the
one individual, few has 2 and one has up to 10. Which is more (CSA likely to experience stabilityself sustenance? 4 1 2 10 = & 2 ee @ 25% § osu Co $12 @ 10% 8... Community 1 and Community 2 have the same species richness, but they have different species evenness 22. 9/2/2024 49 23.Relative abudance of species =number of individuals of a species /total number of individuals In ecosystem 24. Higher species evenness higher self sustenance 25.Loss of species affect an ecosystem as a whole. 26. Rhododendron-himalayas and anamudi hill. 27.Keystone species-maintains the structure and integrity of the community.if they are removed the ecosystem collapses. These species play a unique and crucial role in the way an ecosystem functions. They have large effects on its environment relative to it abundance. 28. Ex-KRILL(FEED blue WHALELARGEST ANIMAL ON PLANET& nutrients carrier and feed on phytoplankton ); BEES; Aligator; elephants 29. Concept-Robert T paine 30. Their loss can endanger the other
28. Ex-KRILL(FEED blue WHALELARGEST ANIMAL ON PLANET& nutrients carrier and feed on phytoplankton ); BEES; Aligator; elephants 29. Concept-Robert T paine 30. Their loss can endanger the other species 31.A keystone species is an 32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. organism that helps define an entire ecosystem ENGINEERS OF AFRICAN SAVANNA-ELEPHANTS. Elephants preserve grasslands by eating small trees because grassy trees need sunlight. If they weren't there the savanna would've inverted to a forest. Corridors help prevent spread of wildfire. (they save lives) Saguaro cactus — Can soak and store up to 757 liters of water during a heavy downpour. — If you ever find yourself stranded in a desert and come across one of these caci remember they have life-sustaining water inside of them. But that’s not why the saguaros are a keystone species. — These cacti offer nesting opportunities to many different species of bird, such : red-tailed hawks, gila woodpeckers, purple martins, and elf owls. Parrot
why the saguaros are a keystone species. — These cacti offer nesting opportunities to many different species of bird, such : red-tailed hawks, gila woodpeckers, purple martins, and elf owls. Parrot fish-algae growth check ; coral reefs. Ecological Biodiversity-Ecological diversity refers to the variety of ecosystems present in a biosphere. o Biogeography is the study of distribution of species, organism and ecosystems in geographic space and through geological time. India is termed as “MEGA DIVERSITY COUNTRY". 38. Bio geographic zones were used as a basis for planning wildlife management in protected areas. 39. Ex: trans himalaya, deser,semi arid Gangetic plains, coast etc 40. Wow INDia Has Ten Different Geographic Classification Systems 41.Western ghats(SAHYADHIRI HILLS), islands, north east India(51 FORESTS FOUND HERE),desers, Himalaya,trans Himalaya, Deccan plateau, Gangetic plains(THE NORTH INDIAN RIVER PLAIN), coasts, semi arid zones. 42.Himalayas consist of the youngest and
east India(51 FORESTS FOUND HERE),desers, Himalaya,trans Himalaya, Deccan plateau, Gangetic plains(THE NORTH INDIAN RIVER PLAIN), coasts, semi arid zones. 42.Himalayas consist of the youngest and loftiest mountain chains in the world. 43.Semi Arid Region-a transitional zone between desserts and denser forest of western ghats. Vegetation-thorn forest. 44.Western ghat(now a UN world heritage sight) are interrupted by only a 30km break-Palghat gaps+shencottah gap+goa gap 45.Western Ghats are also home to special kind of fresh water swamps known as myristica swampls(willd nutmeg) * Most of the Western Ghats endemic plants are associated with Summary of Species Outcomes for the Western Ghats} evergreen forests. ee Beyond the Ghats is Decca Plateau, e a semi-arid region lying in the rai shadow of the Western Ghats. e This is the largest unit of th Peninsular Plateau of India. 46. Deccan plateau-DECIDIOUS FORESTS 47.North East India-Centre of ORIGIN OF Citrus Fruits 48.Lakshwadeep has one of
the Western Ghats. e This is the largest unit of th Peninsular Plateau of India. 46. Deccan plateau-DECIDIOUS FORESTS 47.North East India-Centre of ORIGIN OF Citrus Fruits 48.Lakshwadeep has one of the four coral reef regions of India. 49. East Coast-Wide and Sandy 50. West Cost-narrow and rocky BRYOPHYTESLiverworts Non vascular seedless plantsMeans no roots and no vascular tissues Absorb water from air Cryptogams-—that reproduces through spores rather than seeds o An estuary is a partially enclosed, coastal water body where freshwater from rivers and streams mixes with salt water from the ocean. o Estuaries, and their surrounding lands, are places of transition from land to sea. lo A backwater is a part of a river in which there is little or no current. Ferns do not have seeds or flowers they reproduce through spores. 51.Gymnosperms(naked seeds)-First plant to have seeds and Angiospers (closed seeds in fruits) 52. Coelomates: organisms with a fluid filled cavity. Between the gut wall
they reproduce through spores. 51.Gymnosperms(naked seeds)-First plant to have seeds and Angiospers (closed seeds in fruits) 52. Coelomates: organisms with a fluid filled cavity. Between the gut wall and the outer body wall. 53.Humans are deutrostomes. 54.ENDEMIC SPECIES: remain confined to a particular locality (particular habitat) due to some reason such as the habitat that is favourable for their development and survival. 55. Endemic species are more vulnerable than other species. 56. Reasons: poor in adaptation to different type of environmental conditions; geographical barriers like sea and mountains; less efficient seeds so can't go of to far places. 57.Bali Mynah:most critically endangered bird 58.Largest endemic species are found in southern west ghats and eastern himalyas 59. Dipterocarp trees:hod greatest insect diversity 60. Largest flower in the world:Rafflesia O
